+++
title = "Madan Mohan"
date = 2024-07-04T22:26:31+05:30
draft = false
subtitle = "Saturn's Favourite Composer"
+++

Whenever I have listened to many of the incredibly beautiful melodies of Lata singing for Madan Mohan, my heart has always gone out to the unfortunate character who sang it on screen. Nothing good was ever going to come her way. Even the happiest of melodies seemed only a brief interlude in this tragedy called life. The most passionate of songs were only an invitation to a doomed love. Each note from these beautiful compositions seemed to ride on a background of melancholy — sometimes only a hint like in _Main To Tumse Nain Milake Haar Gayee Sajana_ from Manmauji, sometimes so completely suffused with it as in _Rasm-e-Ulfat ko Nibhayen to Nibhayen Kaise_ from Dil Ki Rahein.

Except for a few honourable exceptions, Sadhana (Mera Saaya, Woh Kaun Thi), Nutan (Dulhan Ek Raat Ki) and Nargis (Adalat), almost all Madan’s compositions were sung by heroines who were never quite top-rung. Two of his great compositions _Woh Bhuli Dastaan_ and _Chala hai Kahan_ from Sanjog was picturised on Anita Guha. Enduring classics _Hai Isi mein Pyaar ki Aabroo_ and _Aap ki Nazron ne Samjha_ were shot on Mala Sinha and Bindu sang _Jiya le Gayojee Mora Sawariya_ in Anpadh. The number of Madan’s gems wasted on Priya Rajvansh is an indication of the saturnine misfortune that dogged him all his life.

When the heroine was right, the film flopped. Nutan’s Dulhan Ek Raat Ki with Sapnon mein agar mere was removed from theatres after just four days. Just once, Madan had his moment in the sun. The Director was right. The Heroine was right. And the film was a certified hit — Raj Khosla’s Woh Kaun Thi with Sadhana ran for 25 weeks and every one thought Madan’s work in the film would surely get the Filmfare award for that year. It got a nomination. But as the rumour goes a rival Music Director rigged the poll and laughed all the way to the podium. Raj Khosla who had worked with him before on the musically memorable Mera Saaya used him in the flop Chiraag and then never worked with Madan again.

Many years after Madan’s death, his son Sanjiv Kohli wrote in a touching tribute to his father (Filmfare, 1997):

> When we went on long car drives, dad would tell us to sing a song. Small and unfeeling that we were, we would start singing the songs composed by other music directors. He’d turn around and say, “Hey, even you!” At that time, we couldn’t understand what he meant. We wouldn’t sing his songs because they weren’t easy to sing. That used to hurt him. Even his family didn’t appreciate him.

Despite the obsequies of fate, Madan’s creative muse flowered. For a film called Aap Ki Parchaiyaan with an unknown South Indian heroine opposite Dharmendra, he composed the classic — _Agar Mujhse Mohabat hai_. For Manmauji he tuned _Chanda Ja_. And then there were the string of pearls for Chetan Anand. Haqeeqat for which he tuned the most rousing patriotic song ever: _Kar Chale hum Fida Jaan-o-tan Saathiyon_, _Ab Tumhare Hawale Watan Saathiyon_ had seven other classics which I fear to rank till this day. And then also for Chetan Anand in Hanste Zakhm was the jazz redux: _Tum Jo Milgaye To_ and the orchestral classic for Heer Ranjha: _Yeh Duniya yeh Mehfil, Mere Kaam ki Nahin_. If it were not for two Madan loyalists — Chetan Anand who used Madan in Haqeeqat, Naunihal, Heer Ranjha, Hanste Zakhm and Hindustan Ki Kasam and Om Prakash (the character actor known as much for his off screen generosity as his on screen villany) who used Madan Mohan in Sanjog, Jahan Ara, Gateway Of India and Chacha Zindabad, many of Madan Mohan’s brilliant compositions would have remained uncomposed. Jahan Ara had three songs by Talat Mehmood — _Phir Wahee Shaam_, _Main Teri Nazar ka Suroor_, _Tere Aankh ke Ansoo_ and the duet with Lata — _Ae Sanam aaj ye Kasam Khayein_. This duet along with the other one from Suhagan — _Tumhi To Mere Pooja Ho_ are two of Talat’s most melodious duets.

The Talat-Madan combination gave some of the most moving songs ever: _Meri Yaad mein Tum Na Aanso Bahana_ from Madhosh, _Mera Qarar Leja_ and _Main Pagal Mera Manwa Pagal_ from Aashiana, _Humse Aaya na Gaya_ from Dekh Kabeera Roya and a multi-singer _Ho Ke Majboor_ from Haqeeqat. Madan Mohan had the uncanny knack of getting the right singer to sing each of his compositions. Apart from Lata, Madan’s choice of Mohamad Rafi was hauntingly perfect. In Chetan Anand’s Naunihal Rafi sang that langourously seductive _Tumhare Zulf ke Saaye mein Shaam Kar Loonga_. For a Guru Dutt Mala Sinha starrer Suhagan, Rafi sang _Tu Mere Saamne Hain_ and for Sunil Dutt in Mera Saaya Rafi’s rendition of _Aap ke Peheloon mein aakar Ro Diye_ is heartbreakingly poignant. Rafi, it seems was hurt at Madan’s stubborn choice of Talat for some of the the best songs of Jahan Ara. But not for long. With a portfolio that included _Main Nigahen Teri Chehere se_ from Aap Ki Parchaian, _Rang aur Noor ki Baaraat_ from Ghazal, _Ek Haseen Shaam Ko Dil Mera_ from Dulhan Ek Raat Ki, _Chirag Dil Ka Jalao, Bahot Andhera Hai_ from Chirag and that hauntingly perfect _Tumse Kahoon Ek baat Paronse Halki_ from Dastak, Rafi had little to complain. And then there the duets — one with Asha — _Humsafar Saath Apna Chhod Chale_ and the other with Lata from Heer Ranjha: _Meri Duniya Mein Tum Aaye_ — a magical dreamlike duet with almost no orchestration apart from the singers own melodious whispers. For Manna Dey too, Madan conjured that classic from Dekh Kabeera Roya — _Kaun Aaya Mere Man ke Dware_ and the achingly sweet duet with Lata — _Bheegi Chandni Chayee Bekhudi_ from Suhagan.

The seventies saw Madan Mohan’s at his creative peak. R. D. Burman had gripped the nation’s imagination with his western rhythms and was spawning imitations from a growing list of music directors. Madan refused to be swayed and composed some of his greatest songs in this period beginning with Rajinder Singh Bedi’s Dastak — a work for which Madan recieved the country’s highest honour — the National Award. Dastak had Lata at her melodious best. _Baiyan Na Dharo_, _Hum Hai Mataye Kuchao_ and _Mai Ree Mai Kase Kahoon_, and then that Rafi’s painful anthem for solititude in a decaying urban chaos (the sound of a horse carriage moving through Bombay’s Foras Road past midnight, rudely cutting the song in half) — _Tumse Kahoon Ek Baat Paron Se Halki_. His work with Chetan Anand for Heer Ranjha and Hanste Zakhm was also in this period.

My own personal Madan favourite is an achingly sweet Khamaj from a film that ran for three days in a seedy Mumbai theatre — Dil Ki Raahein with Rehana Sultan and Rakesh Pandey. In constrast to the immensely popular Lata song from the same film, _Rasm-E-Ulfat ko Nibhayein_, this one never quite made it to the public memory. The same unfortunate film had a melodious Manna Dey, Usha Mangeshkar duet — _Apne Suron ko Mere Suron se Milao_. But the best of the lot was that lilting Khamaj by Lata. The song is almost happy, as if the actor had finally broken free of the melancholia that had run like an invisible thread through her voice and found true love. Like so many of Madan’s gems, lyrics and melody are so perfectly matched that even after hearing it a thousand times, the experience is as fresh as it was the first time. Here it is: _Aap se Baatein Karein Kya, Dil ka Afsaana Kahein. Hosh Mein Donon Nahin, Ab Kisko Diwana Kahein_

Close at number two is Madan’s composition — a seductive Bhimpalas for Mera Saaya: _Nainon mein Badra Chaaye_. Both seem to bring out that extra something from Lata Mangeshkar. Every note, every twang of the sitar, every word of the lyric is just right and every feeling perfectly nuanced. As with many of Madan’s songs, it is difficult to tell what came first — the melody, the arrangement or the lyrics. Like the little known Bawarchi song — Lata’s _More Naina Bahaye Neer_.

Each of these musical classics with a handful of exceptions thudded at the box-office. Yet, Madan Mohan always had the grudging admiration of his peers. Naushad is supposed to have said that

> Madan ke Anpadh ki do ghazalon par meri zindagi ki sari mausiqui fida hai.

Equally none of this fidayeen stopped the carping behind his back. The word that Madan bought misfortune had spread. Some of the industry’s giants at that time — Dev Anand, Raj Kapoor — Madan’s close friends never used him. There is a rumour that Raj Kapoor was discussing Satyam Shivam Sundaram with Madan just before he collapsed of an exhausted liver at Chetan Anand’s house composing for Salim Anarkali — a film that Chetan Anand eventually shelved. Madan Mohan did not survive long. A few weeks later, leaving two doomed love stories Laila Majnu and Salim Anarkali unfinished Madan Mohan died on the 14th of July 1975. In a tribute Ratna Rajaiah — a columnist for The Hindu, wrote:

> His son Sanjeev Kohli recalls that his body was carried on the shoulders of Amitabh Bachchan, Vinod Khanna, Dharmendra, Rajesh Khanna and Rajendra Kumar and when a photograph of this hit the newspapers the next morning, Sanjeev says that he became more popular in college than he had ever been when his father was alive — because they suddenly realised the worth of the dead man by the men who were his pallbearers…

Some of Madan’s unrecorded compositions salvaged by his son have been recently re-arranged as a musical score for a film made by a company that his son heads. Like his college friends, sadly, the unfortunate young of today can grasp the measure of a musical genius only when a pouting mega star lips syncs to them to the waves of his blow-dried hair. This time the stars are right, the film director is right and who knows, the film might just about be a hit. But its just not the same.

Now that is real tragedy.
